first important theme that you talked of
was variation of Y variation in nature
in jeans is so important for survival
yeah right that without you know I'm
sure that can also serve as a metaphor
for cultural variation and diversity and
so on but they're very the second
important point that you make in the
book is sort of carrying through this
example of where we where you know
couple of Nations got it wrong was it's
not just the jeans you have but also the
environment that you have a rather lay
up that plays a very critical role and
so it's not really as simple as just
saying you have this gene and therefore
your X or Y this is that so so let's
make that clear and before we go into
the next step which is to say that two
things are worth while realizing number
one is that biology is not destiny
although it plays a powerful role in
destiny so in other words the genes that
you inherit intersect with the
environment and with us with the
elements of chance with with random
chance to ultimately produce us
ourselves and by ourselves i mean our
bodies our identities our temperaments
our propensity and so forth it's very
important to realize that it's a triply
it's a triple I mean you know it's I
call it a majestic formula it seems very
simple but jeans plus environment less
chance creates phenotype is a majestic
formulas one of the most beautiful
things we've discovered about ourselves
and it's true across the biological
world but it's certainly true for for
humans and and so that's that's an
important idea and the second idea
that's important is that typically most
human traits we'd already talked about
it height but also diseases are the
product not of one gene but of many
genes multiple genes have to intersect
and interact in order to produce the
phenotype so there's the distinction
that Richard Dawkins drawl is a very
nice one which is that genes are not
like a blueprint it's not like your
genetic code has you know in section 1 B
part 7 has a set as it says something
that says make a widget
and put it here and that is your ear
that's not how genes work genes work by
interacting with other genes and then
picking up information from the
environment and thereby creating this
thing that we call the year right so
there is no so and he calls it a recipe
so he makes the distinction between a
blueprint and a recipe most genetic
information is not blueprint information
sort of one-to-one relationship between
what is in the genetic code and what
ultimately gets some if it is there are
some blueprint genes I'll can name some
most of it is not most of it is is the
fact that it behaves like a recipe and
then in recipe you there's no one to one
relationship right you can't say that
you know at the end of the you know when
you bake a cake you can't say well the
butter form the right side of the cake
and the raisins form the left side of
the cake and whatever I may I can keep
on giving analogies so in fact the cake
or your recipe is a developmental
process that occurred because of the
intersection or the interaction but what
you're saying is there's no left side of
a cake or right side of the cake or
exactly she says you need to have
raisins in the cake as long as you have
really long as you have raisins in the
cake exactly so that's I mean that very
naturally then leads to what you were
saying earlier so if if your destiny in
some sense is a combination of genes the
environment and luck yeah so now you
know if we have the power to to do
something of two genes and to sort of
two to cause variation by force through
new technologies but you how important
in the other two factors of luck and the
environment that you know so you may
make changes we may not really have the
desired impact right so and so now
what's important to realize that they
come in a spectrum so some diseases are
very or some genes are very autonomous
so just to give you an example the taste
Sachs disease gene the gene that causes
tay-sachs disease is an extremely
autonomous gene in the sense that if you
have the gene you will have the disease
you'll likely to have the disease cystic
fibrosis good example if you have the
two mutant if you have two mutations in
the Cystic Fibrosis gene chances are
that you will have cystic
process if you have the Huntington's
disease gene chances are a hundred
percent environment no environment you
will have Huntington's disease sometime
in your life with some people laid some
people now if you have the bracket one
gene the BRCA 1 gene that causes breast
cancer it's a little bit harder so there
there's a role of interactions with
other gene gene genetic elements and we
don't know exactly how those
interactions occur some people may get
breast cancer some women will get breast
cancer in at age 24 some will get breast
cancer at age 50 somewhat AG some will
not have breast cancer at all now if you
have schizophrenia there's not one gene
there four or five genes and the chances
that you will if you have that
particular comp 1 / to the highest risk
combination maybe only twenty percent a
higher risk than the normal population
or the or the average risk and so here
comes the question and now we're getting
into the territory of the book so and I
had not expected to write this book I'd
expected to write a book about of
combining memoir and family history and
and the history of genetics but all of a
sudden the second half of this book puts
out I think you know and part of the
reason is and this is why this book is
inserted itself into every conversation
which is I'm going to throw out a
question to you which is imagine
yourself 10 years from now deciding to
conceive a child with IVF and you can
biopsy the child's cells and I tell you
that I sequence the whole genome and I
ask can I tell you that I have a i can
tell you that it's going to be a ten
percent chance of the risk of a severe
neurodegenerative disease would you
implant that child right what if i raise
that number to fifteen percent or to
forty percent and i keep telling you
that the other sixty percent could be
potentially normal there's a woman who's
made the argument as she says to the
genetic counselor she says i'll give you
and this is and this is an example that
she uses I'll
give you a ten percent chance of a child
of having moderate to severe Asperger's
syndrome with a ten percent chance that
they will be Steve Jobs what would you
do and this is the nature of the report
card as it were that we will be
experiencing in our children's lifetimes
if we wanted to we could also reject the
knowledge and say we don't want this
knowledge but we haven't in the past
rejected the knowledge right we have not
in the past with acknowledged for
instance because we test for Down
syndrome down syndrome is a syndrome
where again the penetrance is nearly one
hundred percent if you have the extra
chromosome the child's likelihood of
having down syndrome is going to be
nearly a hundred percent there's a range
of syndromes in down syndrome right not
everyone with Down syndrome as exactly
the same same syndrome as it were but
what we made a decision socially that is
that it's acceptable to take a child
with an extra chromosome and not implant
or not carry that child to commit to a
full pregnancy that decision was made 30
years ago and it's part of our culture
klinefelter's syndrome and so for them I
can go on and on and on but just before
i close i'll just say one thing and then
I'll requested art to read a section
from his book and that is very last
paragraph of the book on what is natural
but what is natural I wonder on one hand
variation mutation change inconstancy
divisibility and flux and on the other
hand constancy permanence indivisibility
fidelity babe and evade it should hardly
surprised us that DNA the molecule of
contradictions encodes an organism of
contradictions we see constancy in
heredity and find its opposite variation
mutants are necessary to maintain the
essence of ourselves the genome has
negotiated a fragile balance between
counterpoise forces pairing strand
against opposite strand
mixing past and future fitting memory
and desire it is the most human of all
things that we possess and so its
stewardship might be the ultimate test
of knowledge and discernment for our
species